# S3 as Storage backend

## I chose S3 when initializing the repository!

If you are reading this section, you are lucky! You will only have to perform a few configuration changes. If on the contrary you didn't choose S3 as storage when initializing the repository file system, [navigate below](#i-didnt-choose-s3-when-initializing) to follow more in depth instructions!

### Create a bucket

InvenioRDM uses a [MinIO](https://min.io/download) container for S3-like storage. To create a bucket in MinIO you can:

a. Install the [mc tool](https://docs.min.io/docs/minio-client-quickstart-guide.html) and run the following command, where `default-bucket` is the name of your bucket.

``` bash
mc mb default-bucket
```

b. Use the web UI (https://localhost[:9000]/minio). In the bottom right you will see a `+` sign, click there and add a new bucket.

### Create a new location

Now you need to tell InvenioRDM where that bucket is. For that, create a new location. If you are running a local (development) instance, run:

``` bash
cd path/to/your/instance
pipenv run invenio files location create s3-default s3://default-bucket --default
```

If you are running the containerized version, run:

``` bash
docker exec -it <web_[api|ui] container name or id> /bin/bash
invenio files location create s3-default s3://default-bucket --default
```

### Set your credentials

The last step is to set your credentials so your instance can authenticate against the S3 container.

By default, the `ACCESS_KEY` and the `ACCESS_ID` of MinIO are "CHANGE_ME", and so they are set in the `invenio.cfg` file. If you changed them (you should) modify them accordingly in the config file.

It's done! Ready to roll!

## I didn't choose S3 when initializing

You are here, but do not panic, it's not difficult just longer.

Coming soon.
